Ao ibc dev (#1005)
cosmos/sdk-tutorials: academy/ibc/ibc-tao-dev.md

---
title: "IBC/TAO"
order: 
description: 
tag: deep-dive
---

# Transport, Authentication, and Ordering Layer

Now that you covered the introduction and have a better understanding of how different Inter-Blockchain Communication (IBC) Protocol components and Interchain Standards (ICS) relate to each other, take a deep dive into IBC/TAO (transport, authentication, and ordering) and the [IBC module](https://github.com/cosmos/ibc-go).

## Connections

> 

Reviewer: would be good to offer more context about why we have pairwise connections:

from the internal recording: Connections under ICS3 allow us to make sure that there isn't a malicious entity who can come in pretending to be a counter party chain and forge incorrect information. It also allows us to establish these connections with on-chain ledger code without us having to rely on off-chain processes

</HighlightBox>

The opening handshake protocol allows each chain to verify the identifier used to reference the connection on the other chain, enabling modules on each chain to reason about the reference of the other chain.

Take a look at the [connection Protobuf](https://github.com/cosmos/ibc-go/blob/main/proto/ibc/core/connection/v1/connection.proto) for the `ConnectionEnd`:

```
message ConnectionEnd {
  option (gogoproto.goproto_getters) = false;
  // client associated with this connection.
  string client_id = 1 [(gogoproto.moretags) = "yaml:\"client_id\""];
  // IBC version which can be utilised to determine encodings or protocols for
  // channels or packets utilising this connection.
  repeated Version versions = 2;
  // current state of the connection end.
  State state = 3;
  // counterparty chain associated with this connection.
  Counterparty counterparty = 4 [(gogoproto.nullable) = false];
  // delay period that must pass before a consensus state can be used for
  // packet-verification NOTE: delay period logic is only implemented by some
  // clients.
  uint64 delay_period = 5 [(gogoproto.moretags) = "yaml:\"delay_period\""];
}
```

> `ConnectionEnd` defines a stateful object on a chain connected to another separate one. Note that there must only be 2 defined `ConnectionEnd`s to establish a connection between two chains. So the connections are mapped and stored as `ConnectionEnd` on the chain.

Reviewer: explain that connection end needs to have an associated client state, IBC is built as a stack (min 21:00 of internal recording)

In addition you can see that the `ConnectionEnd` has different `state`s which will change during the handshake:

![Connection state](images/connectionstate.png)

In the [connection Protobuf](https://github.com/cosmos/ibc-go/blob/main/proto/ibc/core/connection/v1/connection.proto) file you can also find the `Counterparty` definition:

```
// Counterparty defines the counterparty chain associated with a connection end.
message Counterparty {
  option (gogoproto.goproto_getters) = false;

  // identifies the client on the counterparty chain associated with a given
  // connection.
  string client_id = 1 [(gogoproto.moretags) = "yaml:\"client_id\""];
  // identifies the connection end on the counterparty chain associated with a
  // given connection.
  string connection_id = 2 [(gogoproto.moretags) = "yaml:\"connection_id\""];
  // commitment merkle prefix of the counterparty chain.

>   ibc.core.commitment.v1.MerklePrefix prefix = 3 [(gogoproto.nullable) = false];

Reviewer: explain merkle prefixing, 23:12 in internal recording

}
```

This way it is ensured that both ends of a connection agree on each others clients.

You can find the reference implementation for the connection handshake in the [IBC module repository](https://github.com/cosmos/ibc-go/blob/main/modules/core/03-connection/keeper/handshake.go). In it take a look at `ConnOpenInit`:

```go
func (k Keeper) ConnOpenInit(
  ctx sdk.Context,
  clientID string,
  counterparty types.Counterparty, // counterpartyPrefix, counterpartyClientIdentifier
  version *types.Version,
  delayPeriod uint64,
) (string, error) {
  
  ...

  // connection defines chain A's ConnectionEnd
  connectionID := k.GenerateConnectionIdentifier(ctx)
  connection := types.NewConnectionEnd(types.INIT, clientID, counterparty, types.ExportedVersionsToProto(versions), delayPeriod)
  k.SetConnection(ctx, connectionID, connection)

  if err := k.addConnectionToClient(ctx, clientID, connectionID); err != nil {
    return "", err
  }

>   k.Logger(ctx).Info("connection state updated", "connection-id", connectionID, "previous-state", "NONE", "new-state", "INIT")

Reviewer: explain why we have connection-id, 22:40 in internal recording

  proofClient []byte, // proof that chainA stored a light client of chainB
  proofConsensus []byte, // proof that chainA stored chainB's consensus state at consensus height
  proofHeight exported.Height, // height at which relayer constructs proof of A storing connectionEnd in state
  consensusHeight exported.Height, // latest height of chain B which chain A has stored in its chain B client
) ...
```

and `ConnOpenAck`:

```go
func (k Keeper) ConnOpenAck(
  ctx sdk.Context,
  connectionID string,
  clientState exported.ClientState, // client state for chainA on chainB
  version *types.Version, // version that ChainB chose in ConnOpenTry
  counterpartyConnectionID string,
  proofTry []byte, // proof that connectionEnd was added to ChainB state in ConnOpenTry
  proofClient []byte, // proof of client state on chainB for chainA
  proofConsensus []byte, // proof that chainB has stored ConsensusState of chainA on its client
  proofHeight exported.Height, // height that relayer constructed proofTry
  consensusHeight exported.Height, // latest height of chainA that chainB has stored on its chainA client
) ...
```

> both will do the same checks:

Reviewer: explain why, "crossing hellos" section of internal recording

```go

  // Check that ChainA committed expectedConnectionEnd to its state
  if err := k.VerifyConnectionState(
    ctx, connection, proofHeight, proofInit, counterparty.ConnectionId,
    expectedConnection,
  ); err != nil {

>     return "", err

Reviewer: explain difference between VerifyConnection/Client/ClientConsensusState.

from the internal recording:

these states come from stored states in the light clients which need to be updated by the relayers.

 VerifyConnection verifies that the photo they have looks like us (explain this in state terms)
 VerifyClient/Consensus verifies that the photo we have looks like them (explain this in state terms)

  }

  // Check that ChainA stored the clientState provided in the msg
  if err := k.VerifyClientState(ctx, connection, proofHeight, proofClient, clientState); err != nil {
    return "", err
  }

  // Check that ChainA stored the correct ConsensusState of chainB at the given consensusHeight
  if err := k.VerifyClientConsensusState(
    ctx, connection, proofHeight, consensusHeight, proofConsensus, expectedConsensusState,
  ); err != nil {
    return "", err
  }
```

> so both will verify the `ConnectionState`, the `clientState` and the `ConsensusState` of the other chain.

Reviewer 2: see ConnOpenAck: https://github.com/cosmos/ibc-go/blob/86638c29107d8a0ad0c70ad1676523edfeea254d/modules/core/03-connection/keeper/handshake.go#L266

and ConnOpenTry: https://github.com/cosmos/ibc-go/blob/86638c29107d8a0ad0c70ad1676523edfeea254d/modules/core/03-connection/keeper/handshake.go#L159

and the recording IBC deep dive - Connections at 19:30

  ...

  consensusState, err := clienttypes.UnpackConsensusState(msg.ConsensusState)
  
  ...

  ... = k.ClientKeeper.CreateClient(ctx, clientState, consensusState); 
  
  ...

}
```

It creates a light client by calling [`ClientKeeper.CreateClient`](https://github.com/cosmos/ibc-go/blob/main/modules/core/02-client/keeper/client.go):

```go
// CreateClient creates a new client state and populates it with a given consensus
// state as defined in https://github.com/cosmos/ibc/tree/master/spec/core/ics-002-client-semantics#create
func (k Keeper) CreateClient(
  ctx sdk.Context, clientState exported.ClientState, consensusState exported.ConsensusState,
) 
  
  ...

  clientID := k.GenerateClientIdentifier(ctx, clientState.ClientType())

  ...

  k.SetClientState(ctx, clientID, clientState)

  ...

  // verifies initial consensus state against client state and initializes client store with any client-specific metadata
  // e.g. set ProcessedTime in Tendermint clients
  ... := clientState.Initialize(ctx, k.cdc, k.ClientStore(ctx, clientID), consensusState);

  ...

  EmitCreateClientEvent(ctx, clientID, clientState)

  return clientID, nil
}
```

> Each client for a chain has a unique `clientID`. In addition, you can see that the function expects a [`clientState`](https://github.com/cosmos/ibc-go/blob/main/modules/light-clients/07-tendermint/types/client_state.go):

Reviewer: explain when ClientState is updated, ca min 19:00 of internal recording

---
title: "IBC/TAO"
order: 
description: 
tag: deep-dive
---

# Transport, Authentication, and Ordering Layer

Now that you covered the introduction and have a better understanding of how different Inter-Blockchain Communication (IBC) Protocol components and Interchain Standards (ICS) relate to each other, take a deep dive into IBC/TAO (transport, authentication, and ordering) and the [IBC module](https://github.com/cosmos/ibc-go).

> ## Light client

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Light Clients
```

In the IBC Protocol, an actor - an end user, an off-chain process, or a machine - needs to be able to verify updates to another machine's state that the other machine's consensus algorithm has agreed to and reject any possible updates that the other machine's consensus algorithm has not agreed upon.

![Light clients](images/lightclient.png)

Different abstraction layers are described in the ICS.

<HighlightBox type="info">

In case you want to take a refresher of ICS and the different layers, take a look at the section [What is IBC?](./what-is-ibc.md).

</HighlightBox>

> **Light clients** confirm that received packets are verified. With this approch, an IBC chain does not require to maintain a **full node** for the verification of state changes of another chain. A **relayer** has access to both full nodes and passes headers from full nodes to the light clients.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Light clients** confirm that received packets are verified. With this approach, an IBC chain is not required to maintain a **full node** for the verification of state changes of another chain. A **relayer** has access to both full nodes and passes headers from full nodes to the light clients.
```
